Create Documentation for the ComInterfaceGenerator (#36833)
dotnet/docs: docs/standard/native-interop/com-wrappers-source-generation.md

---
title: COM wrappers source generation
description: Learn about compile-time source generation for COM wrappers in .NET.
ms.date: 08/25/2023
---

# Source Generation for COM Wrappers

> .Net 8 introduces a source generator that creates an implementation of the [COM wrappers](./com-wrappers.md) API for you. The generator recognizes the <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.GeneratedComInterfaceAttribute>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Net 8 introduces a source generator that creates an implementation of the [`ComWrappers`](./com-wrappers.md) API for you. The generator recognizes the <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.GeneratedComInterfaceAttribute>.
```

> The .Net runtime's built-in (not source generated) COM interop system generates an IL stub&mdash;a stream of IL instructions that is JIT-ed&mdash;at run time to facilitate the transition from managed code to COM, and vice-versa, on Windows only. Since this IL stub is generated at run time, it isn't compatible with [NativeAOT](../../core/deploying/native-aot/index.md), or [IL trimming](../../core/deploying/trimming/trim-self-contained.md). Generating the IL stub also takes CPU time, and can be difficult to debug when issues arise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The .Net runtime's built-in (not source generated) COM interop system, Windows-only, generates an IL stub&mdash;a stream of IL instructions that is JIT-ed&mdash;at run time to facilitate the transition from managed code to COM, and vice-versa. Since this IL stub is generated at run time, it isn't compatible with [NativeAOT](../../core/deploying/native-aot/index.md), or [IL trimming](../../core/deploying/trimming/trim-self-contained.md). Run time stub generation also makes diagnosing issues difficult.
```

> Code using the built in system might look like the following:

Reviewer: I would instead phrase things differently. Such as:

> Code using built in interop might use attributes such as `ComImport` or `DllImport`. These leverage run time code generation technology.

Reviewer: "built in" -> "built-in"

```csharp
[ComImport]

> [Guid("3faca0d2-e7f1-4e9c-82a6-404fd6e0aab8")]

Reviewer: I would drop the `Guid`. It is very common to not have it. We want to show stark differences and all legacy examples should avoid the `Guid`, unless RCW specific scenarios are being showcased.

interface IFoo
{
    void Method(int i);
}

[DllImport("MyComObjectProvider.dll")]
static nint GetPointerToComInterface();

[DllImport("MyComObjectProvider.dll")]
static void GivePointerToComInterface(nint comObject);

// Use the system to create a Runtime Callable Wrapper to use in managed code
nint ptr = GetPointerToComInterface();
IFoo foo = Marshal.GetObjectForIUnknown(ptr);
foo.Method(0);
...
// Use the system to create a COM Callable Wrapper to pass to unmanaged code
IFoo foo = GetManagedIFoo();
nint ptr = Marshal.GetIUnknownForObject(foo);
GivePointerToComInterface(nint ptr);
```

The COM wrappers API enables interacting with COM in C# without using the the built-in COM system, but requires lots of boilerplate and hand written unsafe code. The COM interface generator automates that process and makes COM wrappers as easy as built-in COM.

> ## Basic Usage

Reviewer: We should have a basic example in dotnet/samples.

Reviewer: If you want to start something I can create a consumer side for a full E2E using DNNE and other features.

[LibraryImport("MyComObjectProvider.dll")]
static void GivePointerToComInterface(nint comObject);

// Use the system to create a Runtime Callable Wrapper to use in managed code
ComWrappers cw = new StrategyBasedComWrappers();
nint ptr = GetPointerToComInterface();
IFoo foo = cw.GetOrCreateObjectForComInterface(ptr);
foo.Method(0);
...
// Use the system to create a COM Callable Wrapper to pass to unmanaged code
ComWrappers cw = new StrategyBasedComWrappers();
Foo foo = new Foo();
nint ptr = cw.GetOrCreateComInterfaceForObject(foo);
GivePointerToComInterface(nint ptr);
```

## Customizing Marshalling

The COM interface generator respects the <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.Marshalling.MarshalAsAttribute> and <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.Marshalling.MarshalUsingAttribute> attributes to customize marshalling of parameters. For more information, see [Customize Parameter Marshalling](./customize-parameter-marshalling.md) If an interface uses `string`s, GeneratedComInterfaceAttribute has StringMarshalling and StringMarshallingCustomType properties that will apply to all parameters and return types of `string` in the interface if they don't have other marshalling attributes.

> ## Implicit HRESULTs and PreserveSig

Reviewer 2: I think this explanation is actually helpful for both built-in and source-generated COM. Would it make sense to pull this out into a different page?

Reviewer 2: The closest existing doc I saw is the examples in the `PreserveSig` API doc (which is explicitly calling out tlbexp/tlbimp): https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices.preservesigattribute#examples

COM methods in C# have a different signature than the native methods. Standard COM has a return type of HRESULT, a 4 byte code representing error and success states. This return value is hidden in the C# signature. The C# return value is converted into an additional parameter in the native signature, and the HRESULT is handled by the generated code, which will throw an exception if the HRESULT is an error value.

For example, the following snippets show C# method signatures and the corresponding native signature the generator infers.

```csharp
void Method1(int i);

int Method2(float i);
```

```c
HRESULT Method1(int i);

> HRESULT Method2(float i, int* returnValue);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HRESULT Method2(float i, _Out_ int* returnValue);
```

```

If you want to handle the HRESULT yourself, you can use the <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.PreserveSigAttribute> on the method to indicate the generator should not do this transformation. Below are snippets that demonstrate what native signature the generator expects when `[PreserveSig]` is applied.

```csharp
[PreserveSig]
void Method1(int i);

[PreserveSig]
int Method2(float i);
```

```c
int Method1(int i);

int Method2(float i);
```

## Incompatibilities and Differences to Built-In COM

### Derived Interfaces

> In the built in COM system, if you had interfaces which derived from other COM interfaces, you would need to declare a shadowing method for each base method on the base interfaces with the `new` keyword.

Reviewer 2: Link to the doc @jkoritzinsky added about COM interface inheritance?

```csharp
[ComImport]
[Guid("3faca0d2-e7f1-4e9c-82a6-404fd6e0aab8")]
interface IBase
{
    void Method1(int i);
    void Method2(float i);
}

[ComImport]
[Guid("3faca0d2-e7f1-4e9c-82a6-404fd6e0aab8")]
interface IDerived : IBase
{
    new void Method1(int i);
    new void Method2(float f);
    void Method3(long l);
    void Method4(double d);
}
```

The COM interface generator does not expect any shadowing of base methods.

### Marshal APIs

The APIs in <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.Marshal> are not compatible with source generated COM. These methods should be replaced with their corresponding methods on StrategyBasedComWrappers.

## See also

- [COM Wrappers](./com-wrappers.md)
- [Customizing Parameter Marshalling](./customize-parameter-marshalling.md)
- [Advanced COM Interoperability in .NET Framework](/previous-versions/dotnet/netframework-4.0/bd9cdfyx(v=vs.100))
- [Runtime Callable Wrapper](runtime-callable-wrapper.md)
- [COM Callable Wrapper](com-callable-wrapper.md)
- [Customizing Standard Wrappers in .NET Framework](/previous-versions/dotnet/netframework-4.0/h7hx9abd(v=vs.100))

> - [How to: Customize Runtime Callable Wrappers in .NET Framework](/previous-versions/dotnet/netframework-4.0/56kh4hy7(v=vs.100))

Author: Good point, that might be confusing
